[16317] Mutable ownership strength change trough parameter node tutorial (#109)
eProsima/vulcanexus: docs/rst/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/mutable.rst

On each of them, Vulcanexus installation, as well as the package installation is needed.
Then, export the `FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE` environment variable to point out to the corresponding profiles file and run the node.

    * In the first terminal, run the `listener` node from the `demo_nodes_cpp`, configured with the `subscriber_exclusive_ownership.xml` file.

    * | Then, in another terminal, run the first publisher, configured also with the `large_ownership_strength.xml` file.
      | This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 10.
      | At this point both nodes should be communicating, and the messages from Publisher 1 should be shown in the Subscriber.

    * | In the third terminal, run the second publisher, configured with the `small_ownership_strength.xml` file.
      | This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 2.
      | This Publisher 2 starts sending messages (it can be seen that the number of the message starts from 1 while the messages from Publisher 1 are already in a higher number), and the Subscriber is still receiving messages from Publisher 1 and not from Publisher 2.

>       | This is because of the exclusive ownership.

Reviewer: * In the first terminal, run the `listener` node from the `demo_nodes_cpp`, configured with the `subscriber_exclusive_ownership.xml` file.
    * Then, in another terminal, run the first publisher, configured also with the `large_ownership_strength.xml` file.
      This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 10.
      At this point both nodes should be communicating, and the messages from Publisher 1 should be shown in the Subscriber.
    * In the third terminal, run the second publisher, configured with the `small_ownership_strength.xml` file.
      This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 2.
      This Publisher 2 starts sending messages (it can be seen that the number of the message starts from 1 while the messages from Publisher 1 are already in a higher number), and the Subscriber is still receiving messages from Publisher 1 and not from Publisher 2.
      This is because of the exclusive ownership.

Author: Done

The ROS 2 middleware layer (see :ref:`concepts_ros2_vendors`) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation, which is needed to be able to change the mutable Qos.
Thus, this tutorial will also show how to use that powerful tool.
For another demo on how to access inner RMW entities, see `demo_nodes_cpp_native <https://github.com/ros2/demos/tree/humble/demo_nodes_cpp_native>`__.

Prerequisites
-------------

The first prerequisite is to have Vulcanexus Humble installed (see :ref:`Linux binary installation <linux_binary_installation>` or :ref:`Linux installation from sources <linux_source_installation>`).

Also, before starting this tutorial, user should be familiar with creating a workspace and creating a package, as well as familiar with parameters and their function in a ROS 2 system.
The recommendation is to first complete the following tutorials:

    * :ref:`tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership`

    * :ref:`CppPubSub`

    * :ref:`intermediate_monitor_parameters`

    * :ref:`CppParamNode`

>     * :ref:`intermediate_monitor_parameters`

Author: Fixed

This tutorial focuses on the explanations regarding mutable QoS change in runtime and regarding access to inner objects of DDS middleware implementation, and for that reason, not all the code is going to be explained, as it is already explained in the aforementioned tutorials.
Create a clean workspace and download the Vulcanexus - Change Mutable QoS Through get_native API project:

.. code-block:: bash

    # Create directory structure
    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_ws
    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_ws/src
    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos
    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src

    # Download project source code
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos
    wget -O CMakeLists.txt https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/humble/docs/resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/CMakeLists.txt
    wget -O package.xml https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/humble/docs/resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/package.xml

    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src

>     wget -O change_mutable_qos_publisher https://raw.githubusercontent.com/eProsima/vulcanexus/humble/docs/resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_publisher.cpp

Author: Fixed

                └── subscriber_exclusive_ownership.xml

Finally, the package can be built.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    colcon build

Explaining the source code
--------------------------

For the case of the Subscriber, this tutorial is not going to explain it, as it is just the minimal subscriber, listening on the topic `/chatter`, already explained in the :ref:`CppPubSub` tutorial.

In the case of the Publishers, the package is using only one executable, which takes an argument to assign the name of the Node.
Here not all the code is going to be explained, as the referred tutorials of the prerequisites section explain big part of it.
For instance, the `/chatter` temporized publisher is explained in the :ref:`CppPubSub`, and the mechanism to respond by means of a user callback to a change in a node's parameter is explained in :ref:`intermediate_monitor_parameters`.

The `demo_nodes_cpp_native <https://github.com/ros2/demos/tree/master/demo_nodes_cpp_native>`__ shows how to access inner RMW and Fast DDS entities, although it is not actually explained.
In this tutorial, that same mechanism is used.

> In the private section of the `Node_ChangeMutableQoS_Publisher` class, the pointers to the native handlers are declared:

Author: Done

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_publisher.cpp
    :language: c++
    :lines: 89-92
    :dedent: 4

> In the constructor, the pointers are populated by calling the APIs provided by the rmw and rmw_fastrtps_cpp, until obtaining the `eprosima::fastdds::dds::DataWriter` handle:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the constructor, the pointers are populated by calling the APIs provided by the rmw and rmw_fastrtps_cpp, until obtaining the :class:`eprosima::fastdds::dds::DataWriter` handle:
```

Author: Done

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_publisher.cpp
    :language: c++
    :lines: 52-55
    :dedent: 4

> When the `Publisher_X_ownership_strength` is updated (for instance, via command line using `ros2 param set` command), the `cb` parameter callback is raised, and the `eprosima::fastdds::dds::DataWriter` handle is used to update its ownership strength.

Reviewer: It is not called `cb`
```suggestion
When the `Publisher_X_ownership_strength` is updated (for instance, via command line using `ros2 param set` command), the `cb` parameter callback is raised, and the :class:`eprosima::fastdds::dds::DataWriter` handle is used to update its ownership strength.
```

Author: Done

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_publisher.cpp
    :language: c++
    :lines: 64-78
    :dedent: 4

In this case, as in the current version of Fast DDS the builtin statistics are enabled by default (see `DomainParticipantQos <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domainParticipant/domainParticipant.html#domainparticipantqos>`_), it is needed to retrieve the internal QoS by means of `::get_qos()`, then perform the modifications and update the QoS by means of `::set_qos()`:
The value of the ownership strength is set from the value of the updated parameter.

Configuration of initial QoS
----------------------------

> Ownership Strength Policy is mutable, but Ownership Policy is not. Then, it is needed to configure EXCLUSIVE_OWNERSHIP_POLICY to all participants before running the ROS nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ownership Strength Policy is mutable, but Ownership Policy is not, so configuring EXCLUSIVE_OWNERSHIP_POLICY to all participants before running the ROS nodes is needed.
```

Author: Done

To do that, inside our package, we have three xml files.

> Each one of them defines a profile for a publisher with a "large" ownership strength, another with a "small" ownership strength and a subscriber (that does not need an ownership strength definition).

Reviewer: `we` and `our` here

Author: Done

For the three of them, exclusive ownership is defined.

.. tabs::

    .. tab:: large_ownership_strength.xml

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/large_ownership_strength.xml
            :language: xml

    .. tab:: small_ownership_strength.xml

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/small_ownership_strength.xml
            :language: xml

    .. tab:: subscriber_exclusive_ownership.xml

        .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/subscriber_exclusive_ownership.xml
            :language: xml

> Build

Reviewer: We already built before. Maybe we can remove the other one and leave this one, up to you

-----

Now the package is ready to be built.
Change the directory to the workspace folder and build using colcon:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    colcon build

Run
---

Open three terminals in the workspace folder.

> On each, it is needed to source Vulcanexus installation, as well as the package installation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On each of them, sourcing Vulcanexus installation, as well as the package installation is needed.
```

Then, export the `FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE` environment variable to point out to the corresponding profiles file and run the node.

First, in the first terminal, run the subscriber node, configured with the profiles1.xml file.

Then, in another terminal, run the first publisher, configured also with the profiles1.xml file.
This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 10.
At this point both nodes should be communicating, and the messages from Publisher 1 should be shown in the Subscriber.

In the third terminal, run the second publisher, configured with the profiles2.xml file.
This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 2.
This Publisher 2 starts sending messages (it can be seen that the number of the message starts from 1 while the messages from Publisher 1 are already in a higher number), and the Subscriber is still receiving messages from Publisher 1 and not from Publisher 2.

> This is because of the exclusive ownership.

Reviewer: I'd put this as a bullet point list

The code to execute in each terminal can be found in the tabs below:

.. tabs::

    .. tab:: First terminal

        .. code-block:: bash

            source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
            cd ~/vulcanexus_ws

>             . install/setup.bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            source install/setup.bash
```

Author: Done

            `# Using profile to set exclusive ownership`
            export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=./install/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/profiles/subscriber_exclusive_ownership.xml
            ros2 run vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos change_mutable_qos_subscriber  `# Run Subscriber`

    .. tab:: Second terminal

        .. code-block:: bash

            source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
            cd ~/vulcanexus_ws

>             . install/setup.bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            source install/setup.bash
```

Author: Done

            `# Using profile to set large strenght value`
            export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=./install/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/profiles/large_ownership_strength.xml
            ros2 run vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos change_mutable_qos_publisher Publisher_1     `# Run Publisher 1`

    .. tab:: Third terminal

        .. code-block:: bash

            source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
            cd ~/vulcanexus_ws

>             . install/setup.bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            source install/setup.bash
```

Author: Done

            `# Using profile to set small strenght value`
            export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=./install/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/profiles/small_ownership_strength.xml
            ros2 run vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos change_mutable_qos_publisher Publisher_2     `# Run Publisher 2`

**Publisher 1 has higher ownership strength than Publisher 2**.

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls muted>
        <source src="../../../../../_static/resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/first_launch.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>

Change mutable QoS via command line
-----------------------------------

In this last section the `param set` command will be used to change the value of the node's parameter created earlier.
The parameter change will cause the parameter-changed callback to be called, which then results in a change in the ownership strength.
In another terminal, try the following code:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws

>     . install/setup.bash

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    source install/setup.bash
```

Author: Done

.. _tutorials_qos_mutable_mutable:

Change mutable QoS through get native API
=========================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

> Background

Reviewer: I think I'm lacking a visual illustration of what the tutorial shows here

Author: Could you please explain or show an example?

----------

Fast DDS over Vulcanexus offers the possibility of not only configuring the QoS policy when creating ROS nodes, but also to modify the mutable ones after the node/publisher/subscription creation.

> The QoS that allow their modification after that, are called mutable QoS.

Author: Done

Please refer to `Fast DDS QoS Policy documentation <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/policy.html>`_ to get a list of all supported QoS and whether they are mutable.

:ref:`tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership` explained the use of the Ownership and Ownership Strength QoS (see `Ownership QoS Policy <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#ownershipqospolicy>`_) and how to configure them within the ROS 2 talker/listener demo.

This tutorial will show how to change Ownership Strength QoS in runtime, after all nodes have been already deployed.
This will be done through the interaction of three nodes (one subscriber and two publishers):

> After creation, the subscriber will only be receiving data from the publisher with bigger ownership strength (corresponding to exclusive ownership QoS).

Author: Done

> After that, the ownership strength of the other one will be changed to become bigger, thus the subscriber will start to show the data of the latter.

Author: Done

> This will be done creating a custom package, following similar steps as in this :ref:`ROS 2 tutorial <MonitorParams>` to be able to change a node's parameter, and respond to that change by changing the Partition QoS of the publisher.

Author: Done

> The ROS 2 middleware layer (see :ref:`ROS 2 RMW <RO2Vendors>`) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation, which is needed to be able to change the mutable Qos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ROS 2 middleware layer (see :ref:`concepts_ros2_vendors`) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation, which is needed to be able to change the mutable Qos.
```

Author: Done

Thus, this tutorial will also show how to use that powerful tool.

> For another demo on how to access inner RMW entities, see `demo_nodes_cpp_native <https://github.com/ros2/demos/tree/master/demo_nodes_cpp_native>`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For another demo on how to access inner RMW entities, see `demo_nodes_cpp_native <https://github.com/ros2/demos/tree/humble/demo_nodes_cpp_native>`_.
```

Author: Done

Prerequisites
-------------

The first prerequisite is to have Vulcanexus Humble installed (see :ref:`Linux binary installation <linux_binary_installation>` or :ref:`Linux installation from sources <linux_source_installation>`).

Also, before starting this tutorial, user should be familiar with creating a workspace and creating a package, as well as familiar with parameters and their function in a ROS 2 system.
The recommendation is to first complete the following tutorials:

>     * :ref:`Modifying Ownership and Ownership Strength QoS Policy <tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership>`
> 
>     * :ref:`Writing a simple publisher and subscriber (C++) <CppPubSub>`
> 
>     * :ref:`Understanding parameters <ROS2Params>`
> 
>     * :ref:`Using parameters in a class (C++) <CppParamNode>`
> 
>     * :ref:`Monitoring for parameter changes (C++) <MonitorParams>`

Reviewer: Please double check that I added the right ones
```suggestion
    * :ref:`tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership`
    * :ref:`CppPubSub`
    * :ref:`intermediate_monitor_parameters`
    * :ref:`CppParamNode`
    * :ref:`intermediate_monitor_parameters`
```

Author: Done

> Create a package

Reviewer: I think we can skip this section and the next one if we do something like what is done [here](https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/dds2vulcanexus_topic.html#prerequisites). We put some commands so that the reader can copy-paste them and have de workspace fully set up. We don't need to explain how to modify CMakeLists.txt or package.xml either. That is explained in the other tutorials you've mentioned before. This way, the reader concentrates better on what we want to convey I think

Author: Done

    mkdir ~/vulcanexus_ws && mkdir ~/vulcanexus_ws/src && cd ~/vulcanexus_ws/src
    ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_cmake \
        vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos --dependencies rclcpp

Make sure to add the description, maintainer email and name, and license information to the `package.xml` file of the created package, as explained in the aforementioned tutorials.

Write sources
-------------

First, the source file of the first publisher will be created, the Publisher 1.
Inside the `vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src` directory, create a new file called `change_mutable_qos_pub1.cpp` and paste the following code within:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_pub1.cpp
    :language: c++

The code for the Publisher 2 is the same, just changing the Publisher 1 names for Publisher 2 names.
Inside the `vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src` directory, create a new file called `change_mutable_qos_pub2.cpp` and paste the following code within:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_pub2.cpp

>     :language: c++

Reviewer: I think we should unify these 2 files into a single class that takes the node name and initial strength as constructor parameters. Then, the main can just take those 2 arguments and create the class accordingly

Author: Done

The case of the subscriber is easier, as it is only need a minimal subscriber for this tutorial.
Inside the `vulcanexus_ws/src/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src` directory, create a new file called `change_mutable_qos_sub.cpp` and paste the following code within:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_sub.cpp

>     :language: c++

Reviewer: If we are going to re-use one of the demos, then we do not need to include de source code or anything, we can just point to it (and make the user download it at the same time as the rest of the code as I suggested before)

Author: Done

Explaining the source code
--------------------------

In the case of the Publishers, the code is analogous, so here the code is going to be explained just for Publisher 1.

> For the case of the Subscriber, this tutorial is not going to explain it, as it is just the minimal subscriber, listening on the topic `/chatter`, already explained in the :ref:`Writing a simple publisher and subscriber (C++) <CppPubSub>` tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the case of the Subscriber, this tutorial is not going to explain it, as it is just the minimal subscriber, listening on the topic `/chatter`, already explained in the :ref:`CppPubSub` tutorial.
```

Author: Done

> For the Publisher, here not all the code is going to be explained, as the referred tutorials of the prerequisites section explain big part of it.

Reviewer: I think it's a very good idea to point to the tutorials that explain each thing. That being said, I wouldn't even put the snippet here unless it's relevant for which we want to explain

Author: I erased the snippets. Done

> For instance, the `/chatter` temporized publisher is explained in the :ref:`Writing a simple publisher and subscriber (C++) <CppPubSub>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, the `/chatter` temporized publisher is explained in the :ref:`CppPubSub`
```

Author: Done

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_pub1.cpp
    :language: c++
    :lines: 19-40
    :dedent: 4

> , and the mechanism to respond by means of a user callback to a change in a node's parameter is explained in :ref:`Monitoring for parameter changes (C++) <MonitorParams>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
, and the mechanism to respond by means of a user callback to a change in a node's parameter is explained in :ref:`intermediate_monitor_parameters`.
```

Author: Done

In this tutorial, that same mechanism is used.
In the private section of the `Node_ChangeMutableQoS_PubX` class, the pointers to the native handlers are declared:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_pub1.cpp
    :language: c++
    :lines: 82-85
    :dedent: 4

In the constructor, the pointers are populated by calling the APIs provided by the rmw and rmw_fastrtps_cpp, until obtaining the `eprosima::fastdds::dds::DataWriter` handle:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_pub1.cpp
    :language: c++
    :lines: 42-45
    :dedent: 4

When the `pubX_ownership_strength` is updated (for instance, via command line using `ros2 param set` command), the `cb` parameter callback is raised, and the `eprosima::fastdds::dds::DataWriter` handle is used to update its ownership strength.

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/src/change_mutable_qos_pub1.cpp
    :language: c++

>     :lines: 61-70

Reviewer: I'd put the entire callback here

Author: Done

    :dedent: 8

In this case, as in the current version of Fast DDS the builtin statistics are enabled by default (see `DomainParticipantQos <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domainParticipant/domainParticipant.html#domainparticipantqos>`_), it is needed to retrieve the internal QoS by means of `::get_qos()`, then perform the modifications and update the QoS by means of `::set_qos()`:
The value of the ownership strength is set from the value of the updated parameter.

Update CMakeLists.txt and package.xml
-------------------------------------

We need to add the instructions to compile the new source files, and to account for its dependencies both in CMakeLists.txt and package.xml files.

Make sure that the find_package lines in the CMakeLists.txt are the following, so substitute what you have for the following lines:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/CMakeLists.txt

>     :language: ccmake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :language: cmake
```

Author: Done

    :lines: 9-12

Then add the following lines to compile and install each node:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/CMakeLists.txt

>     :language: ccmake

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :language: cmake
```

Author: Done

    :lines: 14-36

Inside package.xml file, make sure that the <depend> tags, are the following, so substitute what you have for the following lines:

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos/package.xml
    :language: xml
    :lines: 12-14

Configure initial QoS
---------------------

Ownership Strength Policy is mutable, but Ownership Policy is not. Then, it is needed to configure EXCLUSIVE_OWNERSHIP_POLICY to all participants before running the ROS nodes.
To do that, create a new xml file in the root of the workspace:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    touch profiles1.xml

Open the newly created file with your preferred editor and paste the following xml code:

> .. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/profiles1.xml

Reviewer: These XMLs do not have the `<dds>` tag. Again we can just make the reader `wget` them

Author: Done

    :language: xml

This xml includes one profile for a publisher (data writer) and one profile for a subscriber (data reader), and sets them to exclusive ownership, and ownership strength of value 10 for the publisher.
This will be applied to the Publisher 1 and to the Subscriber.
We need another profile in a separate file to assign a different ownership strength to the Publisher 2:

.. code-block:: bash

    touch profiles2.xml

.. literalinclude:: /resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/profiles2.xml
    :language: xml

This will assign an ownership strength of value 2 to the Publisher 2.

Build
-----

Now the package is ready to be built.
Change your directory to the workspace folder and build using colcon:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    colcon build

Run
---

Open three terminals in the workspace folder.

> On each, you need to source Vulcanexus installation, as well as the package installation.

Reviewer: you

Author: Done

> Then, export the `FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE` environment variable to point out to the corresponding profiles file.
> And run the ROS 2 node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, export the `FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE` environment variable to point out to the corresponding profiles file and run the node.
```

Author: Done

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    . install/setup.bash
    export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=./profiles1.xml
    ros2 run vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos change_mutable_qos_sub

Then, in another terminal, run the first publisher, configured also with the profiles1.xml file.
This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 10.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    . install/setup.bash
    export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=./profiles1.xml
    ros2 run vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos change_mutable_qos_pub1

At this point you will be able to see that both nodes are communicating, and the messages from Publisher 1 can be seen in the Subscriber.

In the third terminal, run the second publisher, configured with the profiles2.xml file.
This Publisher will then be configured with ownership strength value of 2.

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    . install/setup.bash
    export FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE=./profiles2.xml

>     ros2 run vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos change_mutable_qos_pub2

Reviewer: I still think these may be tabs if we put the needed explanations in a bash comment

Author: Done

This Publisher 2 starts sending messages (it can be seen that the number of the message starts from 1 while the messages from Publisher 1 are already in a higher number), and the Subscriber is still receiving messages from Publisher 1 and not from Publisher 2.
This is because of the exclusive ownership.

> Publisher 1 has higher ownership strength than Publisher 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Publisher 1 has higher ownership strength than Publisher 2**.
```

Author: Done

.. raw:: html

    <video width=100% height=auto autoplay loop controls muted>
        <source src="../../../../../_static/resources/tutorials/core/qos/mutable/first_launch.mp4">
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
    </video>

Change mutable QoS via command line
-----------------------------------

> In this last section the ROS command `param set` will be used to change the value of the node's parameter created earlier.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this last, section the `param set` command will be used to change the value of the node's parameter created earlier.
```

Author: Done

Reviewer: Not entirely

Author: I place the comma behind the word `section`

> The parameter change will cause the parameter-change callback to be called, and then resulting in a change in the ownership strength.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parameter change will cause the parameter-changed callback to be called, which then results in a change in the ownership strength.
```

Author: Done

In another terminal, try the following code:

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash
    cd ~/vulcanexus_ws
    . install/setup.bash
    ros2 param set /node2_change_mutable_qos pub2_ownership_strength 50

> With that execution, the ownership strength of the Publisher 2 has changed to become bigger than that of the Publisher 1.

Reviewer: Please review this elsewhere. Bigger normally refers to physical size
```suggestion
With that execution, the ownership strength of the Publisher 2 has changed to become larger than that of the Publisher 1.
```

Author: Done

> You now should be watching the Subscriber receiving the messages from the Publisher 2 and not from the Publisher 1.

Reviewer: Still says you, please remove it
```suggestion
**You now should be watching the Subscriber receiving the messages from the Publisher 2 and not from the Publisher 1**.
```

Author: Done

.. _tutorials_qos_mutable_mutable:

Change mutable QoS through get native API
=========================================

.. contents::
    :depth: 2
    :local:
    :backlinks: none

Background
----------

> Fast DDS over Vulcanexus offers the possibility of not only configuring the QoS policy when creating ROS nodes, but it is also possible to modify them (some of them) after having created the ROS node.

Author: Done

The QoS that allow their modification after that, are called mutable QoS.

`Here <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/policy.html>`_ you can find reference of all supported QoS Policy, and you can check wether any QoS is mutable in these links:

    * `DataReader QoS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/subscriber/dataReader/dataReader.html?highlight=mutable#datareaderqos>`_
    * `DataWriter QoS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/publisher/dataWriter/dataWriter.html?highlight=mutable#datawriterqos>`_
    * `Topic QoS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/topic/topic/topic.html?highlight=mutable#topicqos>`_
    * `DomainParticipant QoS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/domain/domainParticipant/domainParticipant.html?highlight=mutable#domainparticipantqos>`_
    * `Publisher QoS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/publisher/publisher/publisher.html?highlight=mutable#publisherqos>`_

>     * `Subscriber QoS <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/subscriber/subscriber/subscriber.html?highlight=mutable#subscriberqos>`_

Author: Done

> Another :ref:`tutorial <tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership>` explained the use of the Ownership and Ownership Strength QoS (see `Ownership QoS Policy <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#ownershipqospolicy>`_) and how to configure it within the ROS 2 talker/listener demo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:ref:`tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership` explained the use of the Ownership and Ownership Strength QoS (see `Ownership QoS Policy <https://fast-dds.docs.eprosima.com/en/latest/fastdds/dds_layer/core/policy/standardQosPolicies.html#ownershipqospolicy>`_) and how to configure them within the ROS 2 talker/listener demo.
```

Author: Done

This tutorial will show how to change Ownership Strength QoS in runtime, after all nodes have been already deployed.

> We will see how three nodes (one subscriber and two publishers) interact: After creation the subscriber will only be receiving data from the publisher with bigger ownership strength (corresponding to exclusive ownership QoS), and after that we will change the ownership strength of the other one to become bigger, thus the subscriber will start to show the data of the latter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will see how three nodes (one subscriber and two publishers) interact: After creation, the subscriber will only be receiving data from the publisher with bigger ownership strength (corresponding to exclusive ownership QoS), and after that we will change the ownership strength of the other one to become bigger, thus the subscriber will start to show the data of the latter.
```

Author: Done

> We will see how three nodes (one subscriber and two publishers) interact: After creation the subscriber will only be receiving data from the publisher with bigger ownership strength (corresponding to exclusive ownership QoS), and after that we will change the ownership strength of the other one to become bigger, thus the subscriber will start to show the data of the latter.

Reviewer: There are some `we` and `you` here and there that I'd try to avoid

Author: Done

This will be done creating a custom package, following similar steps as in this `ROS 2 tutorial <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/Intermediate/Monitoring-For-Parameter-Changes-CPP.html>`_ to be able to change a node's parameter, and respond to that change by changing the Partition QoS of the publisher.

> The ROS MiddleWare (see `ROS 2 RMW <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Concepts/About-Different-Middleware-Vendors.html?highlight=RMW#default-rmw-implementation>`_) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ROS 2 middleware layer (see `ROS 2 RMW <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Concepts/About-Different-Middleware-Vendors.html?highlight=RMW#default-rmw-implementation>`_) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation.
```

> The ROS MiddleWare (see `ROS 2 RMW <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Concepts/About-Different-Middleware-Vendors.html?highlight=RMW#default-rmw-implementation>`_) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation.
> That is needed to be able to change the mutable Qos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ROS MiddleWare (see `ROS 2 RMW <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Concepts/About-Different-Middleware-Vendors.html?highlight=RMW#default-rmw-implementation>`_) provides APIs to get handles to the objects of the inner DDS implementation, which is needed to be able to change the mutable Qos.
```

Author: Done

Thus, this tutorial will also show how to use that powerful tool.
For another demo on how to access inner RMW entities, see `demo_nodes_cpp_native <https://github.com/ros2/demos/tree/master/demo_nodes_cpp_native>`_.

Prerequisites
-------------

The first prerequisite is to have Vulcanexus Humble installed (see `Linux binary installation <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/installation/linux_binary_installation.html>`_ or `Linux installation from sources <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/installation/linux_source_installation.html>`_).

> Also before starting this tutorial, you should be familiar with creating a workspace and creating a package, as well as familiar with parameters and their function in a ROS 2 system.

Reviewer: `you` and `we`
```suggestion
Also, before starting this tutorial, you should be familiar with creating a workspace and creating a package, as well as familiar with parameters and their function in a ROS 2 system.
```

Author: Done

We recommend to first complete the following tutorials:

>     * :ref:`Modifying Ownership and Ownership Strength QoS Policy <tutorials_qos_ownership_ownership>`

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is the most logical order

Author: I believe it is: The tutorial for Ownership QoS is done without knowing anything of the ROS 2 packages. It is just using XML configuration ; Then, the rest of tutorials are for creating a package, parameters, using and modifying parameters.

>     * `Writing a simple publisher and subscriber (C++) <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Writing-A-Simple-Cpp-Publisher-And-Subscriber.html>`_

Reviewer: The ROS 2 documentation submodule should include labels for these sections so the can be cross-referenced using sphinx directly (no hyperlink). If they don't please add them and open a PR to our fork

Author: Done

    * `Understanding parameters <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Understanding-ROS2-Parameters/Understanding-ROS2-Parameters.html>`_

    * `Using parameters in a class (C++) <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Using-Parameters-In-A-Class-CPP.html>`_

    * `Monitoring for parameter changes (C++) <https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/ros2_documentation/source/Tutorials/Intermediate/Monitoring-For-Parameter-Changes-CPP.html>`_

Create a package
----------------

> First, open a new terminal and source your ROS 2 installation so that ros2 commands will work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, open a new terminal and source your Vulcanexus installation.
```

Author: Done

.. code-block:: bash

    source /opt/vulcanexus/humble/setup.bash

> We will create a package in a new workspace folder named `ros2_ws` in `~/`.

Reviewer: avoid `we`, also avoid `ROS 2`

Author: Done

.. code-block:: bash

    mkdir ~/ros2_ws && mkdir ~/ros2_ws/src && cd ~/ros2_ws/src

>     ros2 pkg create --build-type ament_cmake vulcanexus_change_mutable_qos --dependencies rclcpp

Reviewer: Please break the line into a multiline command

Author: Done

Make sure to add the description, maintainer email and name, and license information to the `package.xml` file of the created package, as explained in the aforementioned tutorials.

Write sources
-------------

> First we will create the source file of the first publisher, the Publisher 1.

Reviewer: Check [Fast DDS - Vulcanexus Topic Intercommunication](https://docs.vulcanexus.org/en/latest/rst/tutorials/core/deployment/dds2vulcanexus/dds2vulcanexus_topic.html), where I uploaded the project to the repo and I  just add snippets to it

Author: Done

We need another profile in a separate file to assign a different ownership strength to the Publisher 2:

.. code-block:: bash

    touch profiles2.xml

.. code-block:: xml

    <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
    <profiles xmlns="http://www.eprosima.com/XMLSchemas/fastRTPS_Profiles">
        <data_writer profile_name="/chatter">
            <qos>
                <ownership>
                    <kind>EXCLUSIVE</kind>
                </ownership>
                <ownershipStrength>
                    <value>2</value>
                </ownershipStrength>
            </qos>
        </data_writer>

This will assign an ownership strength of value 2 to the Publisher 2.

Build
-----

Now we are ready to build the package.
Change your directory to the workspace folder and build using colcon:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd ~/ros2_ws
    colcon build

Run
---

Open three terminals in the workspace folder.
On each you need to source Vulcanexus installation, as well as the package installation.
Then, export the `FASTRTPS_DEFAULT_PROFILES_FILE` environment variable to point out to the corresponding profiles file.
And run the ROS 2 node.

> First, in the first terminal, run the subscriber node, configured with the profiles1.xml file:

Reviewer: I'd recommend using tabs

Author: Done

Author: The fact is that I would want to still explain things between each code-block, and I couldn't do that using tabs. Do you want me to change the explanation in order to use tabs?
